The honest truth, and I'm someone who
lived in America for 10 years,
a foreigner, but I lived there, followed
it closely. The place has become
completely bewildering. And a completely
bewildering superpower is absolutely
terrifying. Nobody likes China.
Nobody. Really.
But they know what it's about. It's
predictable. It You know how the regime
works. You know how the system works.
You know what she's trying to do. That
one can live with.
It's very difficult to live with a
country with this power which is as
completely bewildering as this one has
become. And I've tried to give you some
sense of how I think about it. And in
the end, what I do is see an incoherent
movement of people full of resentments
and hatreds, including amongst one
another, as
but also
amongst other Americans, the rest of the
world, and Trump, who is sort of you can
make sense of him as long as you accept
he doesn't operate in a way that one
would normally think of as rational. So,
when I think of a ruler, I mean,
like him, I'm
I think of Nero.
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the All Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. Joe, [music]
we're we're back in London. We're making
a tradition back in London. We were here
last spring. That last year is April,
this time it's May, but I like the idea.
Let's do a recurring spring trip to
London. Now, when you're in London, do
you feel the urge to sort of stroke your
beard and think about geopolitics? Can I
say, well, yes, for sure. But as you can
confirm, anytime there's like some big,
you know, there's something feels
pivotal or historical, geopolitical, I
turn to you in the office. I say, "You
know what we really need?
>> [laughter]
>> We really need like an episode with the
And I
And it with a with a old guy with a
British accent. Like some of the
moments, that's just what it calls for.
>> You gave the secret away. You gave the
secret all thoughts booking process
away.
>> who it is per se but it's like there's a
certain type of guest that's like, this
is what this moment calls for. Someone
with wisdom, someone with perspective.
All right. Well, you've given it away at
this point, but we we are back here for
our yearly check-in with Martin Wolf who
is of course the chief economics
commentator over at the Financial Times.
One of the most famous geopolitics,
geo-economics commentators of all time.
And someone who is really good to talk
to when we're living through these
potentially historic, capital H,
historic events on what seems to be more
than a yearly basis at this point. So,
the last time we spoke to him was in
April of 2025 and it was just after the
Liberation Day tariff announcements. Now
we're here in May 2026 and we have the
Iran situation going on. We have
headlines about further fracturing of
US-Europe relations. I mean, all of
these potential, potentially pivotal
moments seem to be hap- happening on a
sort of monthly if not weekly basis at
this point.
>> Absolutely right. And as you mentioned,
when we were here last year, it was in
the immediate wake. I mean, I think
maybe even just a week after the uh
or a few days after the Liberation Day
tariff schedule had come out. It was
still during that period of absolutely
insane volatility. And there is a sense
in which I mean, the the the pure
volatility currently is not actually
like it was back then. But at the same
time, perhaps probably because we're in
the middle of a war, ceasefire aside,
April 2025 feels a little quaint
compared to where we are right now.
>> Isn't that something? I mean,
everything's relative, I guess. Yeah.
Okay. Well, on that note, why don't we
bring in our perfect guest, older
gentleman, older British gentleman with
a British accent, per Joe's description.
Per my [laughter] request. Martin Wolf,
thank you so much for coming back on Odd
Lots. Well, I'm very glad to fill a
niche I didn't know you had.
You truly are the perfect guest though,
because, you know, I again, a lot of
people have described you as one of the
most important economics commentators of
all time. And so, I think it's great
that we get you back to opine on some of
these very big events that we're seeing.
Speaking of large events, you have
described the Iran situation as a
nightmare scenario.
Walk us through what you're thinking
there, because when I look at some of
the headlines around markets at the
moment, the S&P 500 closed at a record
on Friday.
It doesn't seem like markets are are
aligned with that particular point of
view. What's going on? Well, I suppose
the so many different things aspects of
this. Um
I've I've been thinking of this
wonderful Shakespearean line,
uh
life being a tale told by an
an idiot, full of sound and fury,
signifying nothing. So, it one feels
that when markets are looking at this,
they feel this is full of sound and
fury, but it doesn't signify anything.
And
uh are I think two possible reasons for
that. One is
the famous Taco line,
um from my dear colleague Robert
Armstrong, that Trump always chickens
out. So, in the end, he's not going to
blow up the world. He's going to find a
way out of this, which will have done
some damage.
Uh it will make, I think, the US look
fairly ridiculous, but it can
it can be forgotten. It will declare
victory and stop. And I I that's still
perfectly plausible, a perfectly
reasonable view, because he's already
sort of stopped the fighting, and it
feels like he's looking desperately for
an end game. The question is whether the
other side will play ball.
>> [snorts]
>> And that is still to be seen. And then
there's the other possibility that in
the end,
um,
a,
if the if the oil were lost, as it were,
forever,
it's the world will adjust to that. The,
yes, the the output from that goes
through the straits is
is very large, but in the longer run, a
lot of it can go through pipelines. They
can build these. It will take quite a
while, and the world can compress this
demand in time.
It might take a few years. The world
growth will be lower. Um, uh,
but what we're losing is what?
About a fifth world output. Oil is much
less important than it used to be uh, 70
years ago. Uh,
prices have risen, but actually, if you
look at real terms, uh,
over the long history of oil prices
since the first oil shock, they're not
sensationally high. Um,
and so we will adjust to it, and we're
very good at adjusting to it. The Gulf
will end up as a different place,
because it won't be exporting the same
way, but it's not enough to derail the
world economy. And uh, incidentally, the
country that is likely to be the least
damaged of the major ones is the US,
which is not not a coincidence. After
all, they wouldn't have started it if
that weren't at the back of their minds.
China will be damaged. Russia is
benefiting, but I don't think that's
going to bother Mr. Trump. So in the
end, um, the the losers are Europe and
China, not favorite his favorite
countries. I think that on the whole,
Mr. Trump prefers China to the Europe,
but the
and the world economy will continue and
there's this huge technological upheaval
going on, which is very much what the
markets are talking about, which looks
transformative.
So, I think the market's assumption that
the profitability of companies is going
to be fine. The world will have possibly
a recession, but that's not the end of
the world. World has recessions. Um
probably not even zero growth. And life
goes on. I'm glad that when you
reference Shakespeare and sound and fury
signifying nothing, you were not
referring to our conversations, etc.
Always something though that I'm anxious
about with respect to our business cuz
we type and talk and it's like, what
does it really matter? All that being
said,
you mentioned the profitability of
companies. And if profits stay high,
then stocks stay high and it's all very
explicable. Recording this May 4th, you
have to admit it's pretty surprising,
isn't it? Like if you knew all the
headlines over the last year and a half
between liberation day and a subpoena
for
Chairman Powell and this war,
the the early existence is pretty
surprising.
>> Yeah, this is what I don't get. So, I
think I mentioned this the last time we
spoke, but both Joe and I did
international relations at university
and we were told over and over again
that the global economy does not like
instability, it doesn't like chaos, and
yet here we are in the midst of a lot of
chaos and things are more or less
chugging along. There's there's just
kidding, right? Yes, I think that's
right and and the
there's been a greater disconnect that I
would have expected. Uh the and so I
have more than once used another famous
quote from a British author. Of course,
it has to be given the intro. Yeah.
>> [laughter]
>> Adam Smith
>> we This is why we come here for this. Uh
there's a great deal of ruin in a in a
country, which was if I remember
correctly, actually said in response to
somebody saying that the loss of the
American colonies was a tragedy, a
catastrophe
for this country. And I think that's the
context. I believe that's the context in
which he said there's a great deal of
ruin in a country. So, there's a great
deal of ruin in the world economy. I
have a favorite
statistic which I use in many of my
presentations cuz it surprised me so
much when I looked at it. So, since
1950,
um on
the data from Angus Maddison must be
right. Um
there have only been two years in which
the world economy shrank.
Two.
And they're both perfectly obvious. One
was 2009.
That was And even then, it shrank
barely. It was close to zero because
China was still growing, lots of
countries were still growing. And the
other was the pandemic. Uh um uh 2020.
Um otherwise, the world economy grows.
And nearly always between two and four
percent. It's changed over time. Why?
Um well, because everybody
everybody matters is in a growth mode. I
could go through what's driving it, but
it I I looked at this actually after the
pandemic. I thought, "How often
is it that we've had a
a genuine recession, a decline in GDP?"
Um now, this isn't GDP per head. There
will be more often times when GDP per
head shrank. Uh but basically, the world
economy is
unbelievably robust. And that's because
lots of people are providing stuff
people want. Uh there are markets. They
produce for the markets. They invest to
produce for the markets. Investment is
very important as a driver of demand, as
Keynes said. And so it takes something
really enormous to stop it.
The I went through the two oil shocks of
the '70s. I was already a working
economist, and they were big shocks, and
we got to terrible inflation and all the
rest of it. Um
Volcker came along, and yes, he did
cause a recession in the US, but it
wasn't global. So, I think we have to
start off by saying the world economy is
incredibly resilient. The second thing
is
that
and that's why I use the full of sound
and fury. If you look at the actual
policies that we've ended up with,
um
they're sort of designed, I'm sure
they're not intent, not really to hurt.
So, the protection is is very uneven.
This was part of I wrote about this
before he Trump got into office. It and
that creates the opportunity is designed
in the system for trade
right? Instead of you
know, if you just put up an average
tariff of 40% or 35% that a lot of trade
would disappear, but that's not what he
did. He he ended up with imposing very
high tariffs on some some
origins. China still has very high
tariffs, but it's the trade diversion
has been phenomenal. So, trade goes
through Vietnam, it goes through Mexico,
and
the IMF had a very nice chart on that in
the the latest World Economic Outlook,
which is the best basically showed that
yes,
direct trade between the US and China
shrunk, direct trade between US Canada
shrunk, but other people have played
taking its place. And in some sense, it
was designed to be porous. Then there
are all sorts of exceptions that he's
negotiated in return for who knows what
with sundry companies like Apple.
Apple would have been very badly hit.
So, it's all very porous, and it's all
negotiable. So, it's not as serious as
all that. And then,
uh the Now, the the shock in the Gulf is
significant, but oil isn't as important
as it used to be, as we discussed. The
energy system has changed across much of
the world, and uh will continue This
will be accelerated, of course, but
that's for the future. And
uh prices have gone up. There will be a
slowdown, I'm absolutely sure.
We might get close, really bad, really
bad. Maybe the world economy grows at 1
1 and 1/2%. But, it's not a catastrophe.
And
finally, profits are robust because,
let's face it, worldwide, labor is weak.
So, companies can manage their affairs
in a way to ensure that they survive.
I'm sure a lot of them looked at this.
I'm sure a lot of small and medium-sized
businesses are very badly affected. But,
the colossi that are generating most of
the profits, particularly the tech
colossi, they're not affected by this.
Now,
this is at least
exposed
um
perhaps not as surprising as one might
have thought. There's a great deal of
ruin in the world economy.
We should see if we can do this entire
episode only referencing British
historians and economic thinkers. Direct
quotes.
>> others?
You know, I was just going to you know,
one other thing you mentioned those
exceptions that you know, the little
last week, I think, Trump announced that
um
they made a little carve out for UK uh
whiskey or something like that. Under
question of the king. So, therefore,
much like us, Trump is a sucker for the
British accent. He clearly It was the
king and everything. He's like, all
right, I'll cave on that. I think that
is some he he Yes, he he's also a sucker
of of
people have grand positions. And didn't
he
Didn't he have a some sort of Maybe it
was true social or something else when
he referred to there being two kings
together. That was I'm sure not a joke.
I think he would like to be king. But
but but when I think about the king he
would most likely
to be, I immediately come to Henry VIII.
Who was a real king who made probably
the single most important decision made
by any
English monarch, namely to get leave the
Catholic Church and make himself
head of the church. Donald Trump would
quite like that, don't you think? And
the
and he was an absolute monarch who
chopped the heads of one advisor after
another.
After I think he quite like that. So,
yeah, he he he likes the idea of being a
king. Now,
poor King Charles doesn't isn't like
that, but at least he's sort of
connected to that. So, I can see the
glamour and he lives in palaces. I mean,
don't you think he'd rather like to Mr.
Trump would like to move Buckingham
Palace to Washington and put it in the
middle? I think the Oval Office makeover
is very reminiscent of a classic
European style palace. I'm thinking of a
particular French one. But, okay,
setting aside interior decorating and
Joe knows that I could certainly talk
about this for much [laughter] longer.
But, you know, you mentioned this idea
of Trump as as king and you also
mentioned this idea of trade
adaptations. And one of the things
that's happened since the Iran situation
is Trump has come out and said, "Well,
if you can't get oil from the Gulf and
you're Europe, why don't you can come to
the US and get oil from the US?" And I'm
very curious how statements like that
play on the ground in Europe given that
on the one hand this is a situation
caused by the US.
I think it's fair to say that Europeans
regard Trump as somewhat unpredictable.
Somewhat. Somewhat.
That's I'm I'm doing an impersonation of
British understatedness here. Um
And then his message to Europe is
basically, well, you know, trust us for
your energy security. Yes. Well,
I think the trust us
has definitively gone. That's hardly
hardly
news. I think that's
true worldwide.
I'm just trying to think, does anyone
actually trust this guy? Um because
being untrust trustworthy seems to me
uh
the core of his modus operandi. I mean,
he wants to surprise people, and he does
in both directions. So, nobody in Europe
believes now that there's any promise
that will come from this administration
that is to be believed. Uh
And and I think that's true pretty well
for everybody. That's understandable
because it's consistent with the
evidence and the behavior and even what
he says. Uh
However, Europe is in a very very
unfortunate position, which is that it
grew so dependent on America for so long
that pretty well
all its
structures,
its defense system very obviously, but
also the things it didn't bother to
produce itself. Um
For instance, the whole tech array. Uh
um
uh
the trade relations, the investment
relations. Um
And of course,
the underlying ideology,
the sort of liberal democracy they
imported. This This all came from
America. Uh
I mean, we'd be wrong to say that it
wasn't there.
A lot of this wasn't there before in
different ways, but after the war, which
was a obviously a the Second World War
and the first and second together, it
was so shatteringly demoralized as a
continent and so damaged.
Uh
we can go through the damage done to all
the different major countries that the
US became the core
of
every aspect of security.
Believe, trust
They were very, very content with this.
So,
whether they were naive or not, very
interesting question,
it's all come as a colossal shock. Now,
Trump one was when they the first
administration of Trump Donald Trump was
uh
a wake-up call, but in the end it wasn't
so bad. They felt, "Oh, well, full of
sound and fury, but didn't signify that
much. In the end, he didn't do much."
So, actually didn't change. Trade policy
didn't withdraw from NATO. He filled his
administration with the sort of people
we're familiar with, we like and trust,
those sorts of Americans. This is a
shock. I don't think it should have been
a shock, but this is a shock. And
in the first year, when suddenly, you
know, your trusted spouse, as it were,
and that's very much the relationship,
um
turns around and becomes a violent
bully, you're sort of in shock. But
worse, you don't know where to go and
live. Who do you get to Who's your
alternative? Do you want to become
friendly with China? Not really. Do you
want to become friendly with Putin?
Absolutely not. And are we strong enough
to survive on our own in all these
different dimensions? Of course not. Uh
the vulnerability of Europe is
staggering. Just think what would happen
if the American administration decided,
if it could decide that, to just close
off our access to the American digital
stack, as it were.
Cloud computing, all the rest of it. So,
then the question is, well, what do you
do? And I think they're still in really
and truly the Europeans at an early
stage of deciding what they want to do,
and they find it difficult to agree.
Uh very difficult. There are so many of
them with different attitudes, values,
historical relations. They don't trust
one another. Very important point, by
the way. Don't You know, the European
history is not so far beneath the art
the surface. Um so, I think we are at
the they're at the stage of absolute
intellectual, moral confusion.
Um but they don't trust Trump. I mean,
you sort of anticipated where I was
going to go with my next question
because, um you know, you've written
about
the the the threat to democracy that uh
both in the way both in Europe and the
US that you perceive the Trump
administration as posing. And you
mentioned that perhaps Trump actually
prefers China to Europe at this point.
And it seems like, as you've written,
the administration seems to have two
specific big critiques of Europe. One is
a particular conception of free speech,
uh which the administration does not
perceive Europe as upholding. And then,
of course, immigration, which they would
associate with civilizational decline
and so forth. Interestingly, in your
writing, you acknowledge that uh both of
those there there there strains or there
kernels to both critiques that the
European government has to take
seriously. Border control, maintaining
those uh liberal values around speech.
How much harder does it or like, you
know, how does Europe chart a path while
also
taking into account those factors which
may have some grain of reality to them?
Well, one of the problems we have is we
don't feel looking at the whole range of
what's going on in the United States
that this administration really does
believe in free speech. Really it's a
particular conception.
It's a pretty mildly quite a bit of
hypocrisy going on. I don't think I need
to to lay that out for your
audience. Uh
but the
um
there are I suppose a number of
different elements in this story. The
I think that the
administration is right.
Uh but I don't think it's a
I don't think they're honest in their
critique, but that some governments, my
own included, have gone too far in
protecting people from what is called
hate speech. Um and that there is a
perfectly good argument that
both in private institutions,
universities and so forth, and in
public, um you don't have a right not to
be offended. Yeah, that is clear.
Um however, my view also is that there
are some forms of speech
that European history, we'll see where
it goes with American history, suggests
are profoundly dangerous. And the one I
used uh
uh in my example of this is that if
you're lecturing Germans on the import
which is started in the most notorious
start of this was Vance's speech in
Munich
uh uh last year uh in 2025.
Um well, the Germans feel that really
would have been a pretty good thing if
they'd stopped Hitler saying some of the
things he said.
Indeed, if they'd removed him and put
him in prison for a very long time and
not instead of just
letting him out when he was put in
prison. The So, there are questions of
what
how far you allow speech to be free.
It's a fine doctrine, but it seems
actually the administration to believe
there are lots of things we really don't
want people to say. So, that's an issue
there. But I I I think there's a a
critique there. On the civilizational
thing, I think
and I wrote this in my book that one of
the things that define a state
and certainly a democratic state
is
the possession of borders.
The
a state and
and citizenship, which is associated
with a state in a democratic context is
is exclusive by definition. It is
the values may be universal, but
citizenship is not by definition. And
that we get that all going all the way
back to the beginning of these ideas in
the for our in our ancient world, the
Greeks and Roman view of what a republic
or a democracy was. So, I think that not
controlling your borders and making sure
that the people who come to live in it,
particularly the people who come to live
in it permanently, are people you've
chosen. That's been a political process
in which you've chosen them is
essentially in violation of the
citizenship
compact. I wrote that at length, and I
think that's perfectly understandable
why many citizens would feel we don't
want everybody in the world to come
here. It would create some very, very
big problems. And I think the the view
on the parts of the left, quote unquote
progressive left, that borders should
basically be abolished is not compatible
with the survival of any form of
democratic notion granted to
citizenship. So, I'm very clear that was
a big
mistake. What worries me more about
the the concept of um
uh of democracy
that is emerging, which you see in the
Trump camp, which you saw in some of the
people you admired like Victor Orban, is
the idea that if you are elected
anything you do by definition is
democratic.
And that is absolutely incompatible,
inconsistent with
obviously the four the core premises of
the Constitution what we would think of
as the Madisonian principles, that there
is such a thing as the tyranny tyranny
of the majority.
Uh so, even if somebody has a majority
it's very rare that they do, that
doesn't entitle them to do whatever they
want. Constraining institutions are the
core of a republic, the republican idea.
And we are we are I am concerned that
ideologies that reject that on the left
and the right are being being reborn
over the last 20 or 30 years, perhaps a
bit longer, and that's what the Second
World War was fought against in a very
extreme form. So, I'm not comparing them
with that. And so
while I agree that there are important
elements of the critique which are
serious and we should take seriously
uh
which I've mentioned, that the critique
doesn't seem to me to be coming from an
honorable place if the aim is to perform
preserve
republics.
If it the aim is to preserve preserve
ethno-national
dictatorships,
which
Mr. Putin would certainly agree with,
then that's something else, but that's
not my side. I feel like it's become a
cliche at this point to, you know, no
matter what happens in the world, uh
people always seem to say Europe is like
the loser. Yeah, it's bad for Europe,
right? Is there a sliver of hope down
the line if if we think that one of the
things that Europe has struggled with
is, you know, strategic autonomy and
managing
uh all these different national
interests, and if we think that
you know, maybe the US emerges as a
force for Europe to, you know, unite
against or maybe um encourage it,
motivate it to develop uh some form of
like centralized strategy or autonomy,
couldn't couldn't we see like a more
united Europe out of the situation?
Well, that's one possibility, and it's a
possibility that pretty well everyone
who's a friend of mine who's European,
and I
uh I suppose I'm one, would
want to seek would want to see.
Uh I think it's important to understand
why it's so difficult. And this gets
back to the sort of
if you like, the historical tragedy of
Europe.
How did it get to be where it is? Uh
the
uh I wrote one column on this, which I'm
particularly uh particularly proud of,
so I will repeat some of the
uh
um
the argument, the um it was essentially
that
Europe transformed the world. It's
absolutely
unambiguously the case. This This
peripheral con- You can call it a
continent
really just a promontory off Eurasia. Uh
um
6 or 700 years ago was pretty
irrelevant.
And it ended up conquering most of the
world
and completely transforming the world
intellectually, culturally,
scientifically, and politically by
creating these vast empires. And one
product of which was the United States.
Uh um
And how did this happen? Well,
there are many arguments about this.
There was a shared civilization
and profound political rivalry. That's
the one the one core element of European
history since the fall uh of
uh or the two since the fall of the the
Roman Empire is that it was Christian
and divided.
And so the European states evolved in
conflict.
And they became very very very good at
it. Extraordinarily good at it. So good
at it that once they really got going,
they ended up by conquering so much of
the world. It's still very shocking that
they did. Uh you know, I still think
think of how
how few
thousands of English people succeeded in
conquering India in the middle of the
18th century. It's completely freakish.
So this fragmentation was a core of it.
And the cultural development, the
scientific was also the core of that
because when there was a problem with
one state trying to suppress certain
sorts of thinking, people moved
everywhere somewhere else. Or the ideas
moved somewhere else. So there is this
idea which I think is right that the
division of Europe actually made it.
>> [snorts]
>> Uh
I think it is very uh
uh
um very powerful idea and correct. And
China's unity
held it back.
Uh because it didn't allow for this
competition. The Europe was built around
competition among the states, among the
rulers, and within them. As a result,
partly because of this I won't go
through all that because it takes too
long. So,
then at the end of this magnificent
process, not surprisingly, when the
modern states were emerging after the
Industrial Revolution, nationalism
became the way of mobilizing the people.
For the first time, you really created
mobilized societies. Before that, the
armies were predominantly professional
uh or class-based uh
armies.
Uh the the French really invented the
the universal conscription state.
Uh and this came culminated in the two
World Wars, which completely shattered
Europe. They It shattered the
uh its idea of itself, its confidence in
itself, and its values because look what
happened in the in the in the the death
camps.
So, Europe's triumph ended up in a
catastrophe. And that's what Europeans
are I'm old enough to remember all this.
I was born in just after the war.
>> Not the colonies, surely.
Not the colonies.
It was actually Europe itself that that
destroyed itself. It in the end, by the
way, that led to the direct liberation
of all the empires because they didn't
have the power anymore to do it. And
America was very keen on its breaking
absolutely right, by the way. So,
anyway, Europe said after that, we have
to be something completely different.
It This is really important. We have to
be something completely different. But
the the most important, we need to
unite, but we're still state member
states. We have different histories,
languages, cultures, and so forth. We We
can't get rid of that. So, we must
cooperate. We want someone to look after
us.
That was the US.
We don't trust ourselves. We've lost
trust in ourselves. Very important, the
British least, which felt that of this
because they got through it. So, they
decided that they would
they feel we can be outside it. We're an
island. But, the others
The enemies are just across the border
everywhere. If you go back to that, the
end of the world. So, we we left
everything to Uncle Sam because he was a
kind, generous
uncle who made a few obvious mistakes,
but basically we trusted it.
That's how we got to where we are. This
is my 10-minute history of Europe. Now,
now suddenly you're saying you want us
to become a superpower.
You want us to be a great power with an
army and a will and we don't trust any
of that stuff. The last time we tried to
do that, we blew up the world.
This is not This is not my thing. It's
still there. It The desire The will to
power, the famous
written, isn't really there. So, that
gets to the answer to your question.
What do I think will happen?
Um
and I think that's exactly the struggle
now because you could see in a sense
there are two forces
in Europe today. One is a centrist
liberal
um rather mild desire to create an
effective Europe, which isn't really a
state, but is more of one than now.
That's the center.
And the other side of the right-wing
nationalists
But, the right-wing nationalists
are
nationalists.
They're not European because when you
start going back to who the who the
nation is, you go back
to France.
Let Let's Germany, but it's going to
happen.
Italy is Italy is a peculiar story. I
won't go into that. But in France,
clearly
the French right is nationalist,
protectionist. It
doesn't see itself as Europe. There
aren't any
nationalists in the sense that
Vance is a nationalist or Trump is a
nationalist who are European
nationalists. It doesn't
It's an exciting There are, but there
aren't many. And in political will terms
then, you have this either mild
centralizing desire to pull together, be
a more effective club, you which is what
I would like to see, or it's yes, we
would like to be a great power again,
but it's the nation. And as one famous
European politician once said, in Europe
there are small countries and small
countries that don't realize they're
small. And
so
if you honestly ask me how this will
play out,
I have no idea. And I don't think anyone
does. I know what I would like to see.
I've indicated it, but that may not be
what is possible. What you really need
is a European Charlemagne or Napoleon.
And that doesn't come out of this cuz
there isn't a European with that will.
The last European will to make Europe
was Hitler.
That's what he wanted to do. It would
have been a German Reich, but it would
have And before that was Napoleon. And
before that
Louis XIV
briefly mentioned. So I think the
question of what Europe's future is,
um what it can be given its history of
fragmentation and the extraordinary life
that came out of this fragmentation, I
think it's just not
at all clear. But there's no doubt
that America is helping.
Uh if it if it does develop an
independent
sense of itself with its own
institutions, sense of destiny, sense of
identity, very difficult in a
multinational state like this, entity
like this, then it will be because the
Americans are saying, "You can't trust
us.
We're going to beat you around
the head if you don't sort yourself
out." Maybe that will come. That a
fantastic sort of overview of the
history and the core challenge. I'm
curious look, setting the future is
predicting the future is impossible. So,
maybe we'll just stick to the present
and the past. The UK left Europe. So,
the the UK left the sort of structure
that was put in place to sort of
denationalize the content continent and
so forth.
>> join late. Join late.
>> Not accidentally. But also
like Okay, so the UK in theory has more
sovereignty now than it had when it was
part of the EU. What's it doing with
that sovereignty? Because it doesn't
look like it's been able to put it, you
know, it looks like more or less the
struggles of continental Europe and the
UK are more or less shared. Well, that's
>> What's what's holding the UK back? It's
a perfect example of a of a small
country that thought didn't realize it
was a small country. They thought that
the
the people who sold this
>> Yeah. uh
sold this in part because they said this
will stop all these immigrants. It
turned out actually we could do a
stupendous job of accepting immigrants
from everywhere else in the world as
soon as we stopped the Europeans. So,
that was sort of sort of they were sold
a bill bill of goods on that. It was
pretty obvious. Uh and
they were told we would be able to do
all sorts of wonderful deals on our own,
and we've done a few minor deals. One of
the deals we were promised was a was a
free trade deal with America. That
certainly didn't happen.
The point is Britain on its own
uh
is a minor power.
So, the idea that the liberating
ourselves from the EU will mean that we
would suddenly have
huge choices to transform ourselves and
our relations with the world was a
fantasy. Now, that's one side. The The
other side of it is, of course, that a
very large part of what we had in common
with Europe.
The welfare state.
We had a relatively undeveloped one, but
we have it in common.
Um
the problems of our economy,
deindustrialization,
the difficulty of coping with Chinese
competition, for example, become more
obvious. The The our weakness in
technology, uh
and so forth,
we share with Europe. You Britain wasn't
different from and therefore didn't have
completely different options from
European countries. We're very similar.
Uh we
The Germans and they're all different in
a certain ways, have different
strengths, but actually in the big
picture, Britain is just another
European country. How else How What else
could it be? Look at its history. The
only difference is got this tiny little
waterway between us, and that's
preserved independence. I'm not saying
it's nothing, but essentially the
opportunities and the challenges for the
British economy are essentially those of
Europe, and leaving the EU hasn't
suddenly given us an enormous number of
new opportunities, which allowed uh
Britain to transform itself and
certainly no British political leader,
and I can say this with some confidence
looking at the whole lot, have any
fundamentally new ways of operating
here, which are going to transform the
performance of the country.
Um
and that's become more and more obvious
and it will be even more obvious if
uh Nigel Farage or Zac Goldsmith becomes
the next Prime Minister. I think it's
going to be Zac, by the way.
Just my little prediction. I'm putting
I'm putting my marker down.
>> I think that's unlikely, but what the
hell what do I know? Should I Should I
broker a bet here?
The The The I mean, I'm confident that
either of them will finish the job off
here.
Uh uh
The There isn't a uh
a coherent strategy.
Nobody offers a coherent strategy for
solving the problems of Britain as they
are now and and it's partly because
they've actually genuinely become very
very difficult. Since we've been talking
sort of broad strokes history
>> Very broad. throughout this Yes. Um
can you give us your thoughts on like
what is the world that the US is
ultimately
working towards? In as much as you can
try to eke out a coherent strategy from
the Trump administration. Like what is
it that they are working towards?
I
I'm almost speechless in response to
that very very good question because
it's very difficult.
Um
Part of the problem, I think,
is
uh
the
I see a separation between Donald Trump
as a person.
Very
him
obviously charismatic and exciting uh
and his views of the world
from that of the various different
elements of the coalition that he's put
together, which is a pretty strange
coalition, pretty intellectually,
culturally. It includes, obviously, a
very large number of spectacularly
wealthy and powerful business people,
some of whom
have a religious belief in the future.
Right?
And at the other hand, it it includes
intellectual elements and people who
have a religious belief in the past.
I mean, pretty obvious. They want to go
back to a theocratic state or theocratic
state structures. They want to
establish, reestablish
patterns of behavior and relations
between men and women, between races and
so forth, which is sort of
old-fashioned. So, there's there's a
a blistering new and a
a crusty old, as it were, trying to work
together here. Um
uh there are intellectual elements and
then
relatively small numbers, I presume, and
a huge mass of very dis- dissatisfied
people, particularly as far as I can
see,
um
uh men and old people.
Um
What do these people have in common?
What So, to answer the question, what do
I think America is about,
I I don't know because I don't think
this the MAGA movement, broadly defined,
if that can be used that word, knows
what it wants cuz I'm not saying that
individuals, people don't, but they
don't share anything that
is
completely What?
>> Other than their affinity for Trump. And
okay, I understand this view, what they
might share, and as long as somebody
like Trump is there,
um
Trump wants to be
king. I think it's pretty clear. He
wants to be a man who says, "My word is
law."
It's pretty obvious.
Uh he wants to rule a state
which is free to do anything.
Which is anything he wants and is bound
by no constraint or law or rules
external or internal.
Uh and uh
and Luke Peters would have understood
this. I mean, it's perfectly
understandable. This is how much of
point of my
much of humanity was ruled in since the
agrarian age. Any Egyptian pharaoh would
have understood this. So, he he wants
that. He has no ideology really beyond
that except it is very, very important
to make clear in every bilateral
relations. He thinks bilaterally that
he's the boss.
And the others aren't. And so, he will
throw his weight around. Uh
particularly against anybody who thinks
he's essentially not showing him proper
respect in various different ways. So,
Maduro, so
uh the the mullahs.
Uh and is the
And that's important. The only
constraint on my is my own sense of
morality. Well, you work out what that
means. So, that is what he wants, what
he wants to be, and he will naturally
respect people who are like him.
That's the um
the
the the movement, I think, uh
has multiple different objectives. Some
of them would like the United States,
which
coincides with Trump, to the United
States to be a 19th-century great power.
Um like Britain in 1850. Palmerstonian
Britain, you know, we have no permanent
friends and no permanent enemies. We
have permanent interests. That would be
a more intellectual version of this and
obviously lots of them think that. But
some of them pretty well obviously Hegg
is a is a Christian crusader. That's a
completely different set of ideological
aims. Vance seems to be an isolationist.
So there's nothing coherent there.
And so in the end when I look at this, I
think this is Trump's party. And with
Trump what you will get is
action
but
not intellectually grounded, pretty
ignorant. He will use a lot of power.
If it doesn't work, he will withdraw.
Thank heavens.
That's what I see.
The
It doesn't seem to me that we're looking
at the US under this regime and looking
at the people around that has a coherent
sense
as a whole of what it wants to be and
what it wants to do.
That's terrifying.
Because it is the most important country
in the world. It is the guarantor of the
system which I like to point out works
sensationally well for the US. So one of
the most astonishing thing to me is that
if you look at it from outside, the US I
mean I think it makes an incredible mess
of its own policy and politics. It could
do much better. But the US is a
spectacular success. Why does everybody
want to change everything? It seems very
difficult to understand.
You know
if you compare it with the Roman Empire,
the United States is sort of in the
second century.
So what's the problem? But this US is
what I see now. It could change
presumably though I have no idea
whether it could change durably. And
this is my last point is very much a
part of my
new
postscript for my
book.
You
won't restore confidence in the rest of
the world that the US sort of knows what
it's doing and what it's about, has a
coherent sense of itself just by a
defeat in one election.
Because that's not it. That's not over.
You have to think that this is has
become unthinkable.
And
that doesn't seem to me likely looking
at it. So the the the honest truth and
I'm someone who lived in America for 10
years as
a foreigner but I lived there and
followed it closely. The place has
become completely bewildering and a
completely bewildering superpower is
absolutely terrifying. Nobody likes
China.
Nobody.
Really.
But they know what it's about. It's
predictable. It you know how the regime
works. You know how the system works.
You know what she's trying to do.
That one can live with.
It's very difficult to live with a a
country with this power which is as
completely bewildering as this one has
become. And I've tried to give you some
sense of how I think about it and in the
end what I do is see an incoherent
movement of people of full of
resentments and hatreds including
amongst one another
but also
a might against other Americans the rest
of the world and Trump who is sort of
you can make sense of him as long as you
accept he doesn't operate in a way that
one would normally think of as rational.
So when I think of a ruler I mean
like him I'm
I think of Nero. You know there's a
million ways we could have mind things I
I could ask you. I Wait, isn't isn't
that your cue to to ask about Roman
Empire history? Isn't that
>> Could we could go
>> You're a middle-aged guy. Come on.
>> true. You know what I haven't thought
about that
phase yet. I have a
You know you you said um
>> I studied Roman history. You did. I
studied classics.
And so I so I read I read a lot of
ancient Greek and Latin. I had
>> at Oxford. So you you are always in fact
thinking about the Roman Empire.
>> I [laughter]
the first and best column by far I wrote
about Donald Trump it was in March 2016
when I said
Donald Trump is how great Republics meet
their end. That was the headline and it
compared him with the Caesars Julius and
Augustus who Octavian who basically
ended the Roman Empire.
But they were far cleverer. You know,
you mentioned that
Europe excelled during a period in which
there was competition among states but
also the shared and you use the word the
Christian civilization. When I think you
know, you mentioned
>> they did to have 250 years of religious
war along with the that period. But you
mentioned the sort of like the mild
liberal
you know, not quite a European
nationalism but this like sort of mild
liberal desire for
some sort of Europe that exists. You
know, one thing I think about like is
there like should there be maybe
philosophically
maybe in practice like does would it
would it go along well with the revived
Christianity in Europe because when I
think about secular liberal Europeans I
one thing is like nobody goes to church
but historically a lot of liberal ideas
were you know, co-located so to speak
with Christian ideas particularly around
sort of like equal rights and there's a
lot of framing. Does that could that
underpin or could that be a tailwind for
a sort of reinvigorated Europe if it
found that sort of spiritual vector
again?
One of the things that uh um
I think is very important in um
which I didn't stress in the
the history of the last what
200 years.
Um
particularly the 20th century
is uh Europe spawned a lot of
ideologies.
To say the least.
>> Spawned all of them.
>> [laughter]
>> Uh so obviously every variety of
Christianity you can imagine which they
happily fought over
for much of their history.
Uh Orthodoxy, Catholicism
Protestantism um
uh uh
and so forth.
And of course socialism, communism
um
uh fascism uh the the the dominant
ideologies of the world. And one of the
things
that happened uh
as a result of the religious wars
which were devastating.
Um
arguably the most destructive single war
in European history, though it's very uh
it it's in a particular place based in
Germany uh
was the 30 Years' War in the early 17th
century and I believe something like 30%
of the population was killed.
Uh
it's what I read. Uh
and it was it was many other things, but
it was also a religious war.
So
by the that was the 17th century and
everybody believed that probably is when
everybody really believes in something,
they often find an excuse for killing
people who don't.
>> Yeah. Uh [snorts] uh
I won't even talk about the what
happened to Jews. Uh and the and then of
course the same thing happened with
nationalism which led to some pretty
spectacular wars and communism.
Uh
uh
though that was more mass murder
internally. So,
Europeans became, and this is part of I
think European culture, civilization
after the Second World War, became
exhausted
with ideology.
>> Yeah. We wanted to stop that because
when we, I think it was very widely
shared, whenever we got one of these, we
ended up with mass murder. And the truth
is,
nothing bad has ever happened to the US
except your idiotic Civil War, which
should never have been fought because
the Civil because slavery should have
just been abolished by then. It wasn't
justifiable. So, the point is, but one
of the my favorite statistics, I don't
can't remember the exact figures, but um
if you compare the number of Americans
who died in war,
uh I think it's a little somewhere over
a million in
in the
uh in in including the Civil War,
million and a half. You you can probably
give me the the exact figures. Um
in Europe, it's many tens of millions.
So,
the idea of really believing in things,
really really believing things to the
point that you actually want to go and
kill people who don't share those
beliefs, uh which is where it seems to
go, is very very frightening. Now, the
younger generation now, my now forgot
enough history to start it again. So, it
might it might happen. But that was a
dominant part. Yes, we wanted to defend
ourselves against communism cuz it was
one of those ideologies, European
ideologies, that had gone wrong pretty
obviously. We had realized, most of us,
uh what um Stalin's death camps,
Stalin's
um gulag meant in terms of deaths. Uh
so, Europeans didn't want that. And we
look at I'm I'm when I say we I'm I I
look at these Europe Americans now with
the enthusiasm for ideology
uh and for passionate belief and also
all I see is people who want to come and
kill their their neighbors because they
have the wrong views or they're the
wrong color or they're the wrong
whatever.
Uh and that's Europe. That's European
history. Uh
hecatombs.
Um
Now, the problem with that
is if you carefully is toleration is
your dominant mode, you can accept
everybody except the intolerant and you
crowd them out. Uh
that doesn't last as you rightly say.
Sooner or later people start getting
passionate beliefs again and we may be
moving in that direction.
But I'm one of those people who thinks
once you're in that mode,
it's very difficult to find the off
switch because sooner or later everyone
around you starts thinking looking like
an enemy.
And
so I don't want to go that and most
Europeans of my generation or even
somewhat younger don't want to go that
because we bear the scars and I think in
a different way, why do the Chinese in
the end accept the current regime?
Because it works and it doesn't kill
them all
and they don't want to lunatic again. So
we're not going to become go where you
are because we tend to think where
you're going
could ultimately lead you to some very
very dark places.
I wasn't expecting this conversation to
be so sort of um state-centric in many
ways, but but since we've gone in this
direction and since again we're talking
about the long arc of history here and
society. Can you talk a little bit about
the impact of AI on, you know, if we
think about the social contract between
a state's population and its political
authority?
What does it mean when work starts to be
automated, when maybe culture becomes
more automated? I realize this is a very
general big picture question, but I know
you're
If anyone can respond to this, you can.
Well, I think of this as the
the ultimate Faustian bargain. Uh so,
um
uh
the devil promises
infinite
wealth and power to Faust in return for
his immortal soul,
which is in some sense his meaning.
And he makes the bargain and it doesn't
end well.
Um
So, we have been fantastically
innovative and creative, and we have in
the process made ourselves vastly
wealthier and
uh wiser in some obvious ways. Um but
we're always scratching the brink of
catastrophe as a result. And the last
thing that really motivated people
around those lines was nuclear weapons.
Created uh
People like Einstein got terribly
frightened about what they created.
Well, I think of AI that way.
Uh we have uh
we have made a Faustian bargain, and we
have created
a servant, quote unquote, with the
capacity to replace us or even in some
way to dominate us.
Uh
where this will end up, I don't know.
But it seems to me there are a number of
absolutely terrifying dangers. I
I I think and I thought for the first
time it I read about it three or four
years ago that it was
going to prove completely unregulatable.
It would the competitive process and so
forth. It would make institutions that
used it unaccountable in some profound
way because decisions were not being
taken by anyone you can hold to account.
Uh
what is the difference you know
you it would create transformation in
our society
in our economy and in our sense of
ourselves
which was unavoidably just
of an order magnitude different from
anything that had came come before. Um
and
in the short to medium run a lot of this
would seem very helpful
very encouraging. We will we'll enjoy
it. We will be able to do things we
couldn't do other otherwise, but if we
do get to artificial general
intelligence and it's absolutely clear
that the machine dominates humanity in
terms of what it can do intellectually
in every possible way, then there is an
existential question obviously there is
what is humanity for?
And what does you will human beings
think therefore?
Um
So when I thought about this and I leave
aside the other obvious dangers the
creation of pathogens we can't possibly
manage the creation of armies
AI run armies which are completely
bought armies which could control
human populations so they're just flesh
and blood with such all this is
absolutely terrifying and we're dancing
into this
unseeingly
under the direction of four or five
geniuses and their companies and that's
what's happening.
Um
so
my instinct probably those of an old man
with with grandchildren, is it should
all be closed down, but it possibly not
going to happen.
The
interesting
I do think it's transformative. I think
it's going to be transformative in
business. Pretty clear they're going to
be powerful business models. I can
perfectly well understand that 10 years
from now there will be no marketing
bolts because the computer will do it so
much better. No, that'd be less fun.
Uh the but the
I think we've just have to say we are
stepping into the unknown.
Uh we should do our best to work out
what the big dangers are and focus on
them.
And with our current politics, that's
impossible, clearly impossible. And the
um
uh
but I think I think it is a huge moment
in human history. Possibly the single
most important invention, and there have
been some very very important ones. Uh
and we human humanity will change
profoundly. Humanity was changed by
writing
profoundly. It was
transformed by publishing, by
uh
the ability to print. It um it was
transformed by the internet. I think
this is probably more important than all
of these put together, but I'm not sure.
But my instinct is
I'm a great fan of Frank Herbert, uh the
Dune uh the Dune uh books, particularly
Dune itself. And his idea that at some
point in the past there was something
called a Butlerian Jihad, in which at
the end of which machines that think
were banned.
I wouldn't be terribly surprised if 100
years from now people, if there are
people still around, will say, "We
should have done that." Dune references
were also not where I was expecting this
conversation to go, but um
>> Science fiction is better on this sort
of stuff than anything else. Yeah, I
suppose that's true.
>> fiction writers
are Asimov is another of my fans.
Uh my heroes, sorry.
Uh uh uh
he would wrote wonderfully.
The The laws of robotics, and nobody
seem to be thinking about those either.
We should get a list of recommended
sci-fi books from Martin and put it in
the newsletter. We'll follow up with you
afterwards.
>> Um
Martin Wolf, uh another amazing
conversation. Thank you so much for
coming back on All Thoughts.
Well, it's certainly not what I
expected.
>> [laughter]
>> Thank you so much. Joe, that was
fascinating. Indeed.
>> I feel a little bit like I was back at
university getting a history lecture. I
also just realized since we've come to
London from Madrid,
>> Yeah. we could hit maybe four I want to
say four more European cities and get a
complete European colonial tour. So, got
to go to Lisbon, Paris,
>> Yeah. Brussels.
That's three. What about us?
>> We need to make a We need a European
tour. We need a We need to make this a
recurring spring trip to London. There
was so much in that conversation that
was interesting. So, I do think Martin
hit on something, and it's funny cuz
this came up in our conversation from
last year as well where we were talking
about the dollar reserve system and the
idea that like yes, okay, there are
downsides to having the world's reserve
currency, but there are also a lot of
upsides including being able to run a
massive fiscal deficit. But like
his point that it's difficult to
understand why so many Americans in
particular are so aggrieved as to want
to blow up an existing structure
that compared to the rest of the world
seems to have benefited them enormously.
It's I love his point about the sort of
like and it raises some questions about
the the short-term future like just a
few years from now of so like what is
the Trump coalition for example? There's
a really big difference between the AI
focused Peter Thiel world versus some of
the people who would like a world to go
back to the 1950s and so forth. Another
thing that I hadn't really appreciated
until he articulated
on the Europe question. You know when we
do we joke about the EU and they love
their documents and their reports and
their studies and regulations and stuff
like that. But there's sort of not just
okay, let's put in some mechanisms to
avoid
World War II again or something like
that. But there's sort of the complete
exhaustion of ideology. It's such an
interesting It's such an interesting
framing. It's like every time we've
gotten into some new ideology like ends
terribly. So it's like let's let's make
the attempt of sort of
creating a post-ideological
superstate in somewhere. It's such an
interesting framing and like I don't
know like maybe it's that was a maybe
that's an experiment with a finite
finite time span. I guess we'll find
out. Um shall we leave it there? Let's
leave it there. Okay. This has been
another episode of the Odd Lots podcast.
I'm Tracy Alloway. You can follow me at
Tracy Alloway. And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
You can follow me at The Stalwart.
Follow our producers Carmen Rodriguez at
Carmen Arman, Dash Bennett at Dash Bot,
Kell Brooks at Kell Brooks, and Kevin
Lozano at Kevin Lloyd Lozano. And for
more Odd Lots content including
potentially Martin Wolf's sci-fi book
recommendations, you should check out
our daily newsletter. You can find that
at bloomberg.com/oddlots.
>> And you can chat about all these topics
24/7 in our Discord discord.gg/oddlots.
And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please leave a comment or like the
video or better yet subscribe. Thanks
for watching.
>> Ooh.
>> [music]